networking: Document how to customize NIC names (#146)
coreos/fedora-coreos-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/customize-nic.adoc

:experimental:
= How to Customize a NIC Name

== Using a `systemd` Link File

> You can create a `systemd` xref:https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.link.html[link file] with `ignition` configs.

Reviewer: `s/ignition/Ignition`

Reviewer: For your reference: https://github.com/coreos/fedora-coreos-config/pull/344#discussion_r435419740

Author: thanks!

For example, to name NIC with the MAC address `12:34:56:78:9a:bc` to "infra", place a `systemd` link file at `/etc/systemd/network/25-infra.link` using the xref:fcct-config.adoc[FCCT] configuration snippet shown below:

.Example: Customize NIC via systemd Link File
[source,yaml]
----
storage:
  files:
    - path: /etc/systemd/network/25-infra.link
      mode: 0644
      contents:
        inline: |
          [Match]
          MACAddress=12:34:56:78:9a:bc
          [Link]
          Name=infra
----

== Using Udev Rules

> Similarly, also through `ignition` configs, to name NIC with the MAC address `12:34:56:78:9a:bc` to "infra", create a xref:https://linux.die.net/man/8/udev[udev rule] at `/etc/udev/rules.d/80-ifname.rules` using the xref:fcct-config.adoc[FCCT] configuration snippet shown below:

Reviewer: same as above

.Example: Customize NIC via Udev Rules
[source,yaml]
----
storage:
  files:
    - path: /etc/udev/rules.d/80-ifname.rules
      mode: 0644
      contents:
        inline: |
          SUBSYSTEM=="net", ACTION=="add", DRIVERS=="?*", ATTR{address}=="12:34:56:78:9a:bc", ATTR{type}=="1", NAME="infra"'
----

== Networking in the `initramfs` via Kernel Arguments

> If networking in the `initramfs` is required, the `dracut` argument `ifname=` dynamically creates a udev rule to change the name of a NIC. This gets applied via `ifname-genrules.sh` from the `40network` dracut module which creates a rule in the `initramfs`.

Reviewer 2: The second sentence here is an implementation detail (it can slightly change at any point without effects on the feature). It can be dropped, also to avoid overloading the reader.

:experimental:
= How to Customize a NIC Name

== Using a systemd Link File
You can create a systemd xref:https://www.freedesktop.org/software/systemd/man/systemd.link.html[link file] with Ignition configs.

For example, to name NIC with the MAC address `12:34:56:78:9a:bc` to "infra", place a systemd link file at `/etc/systemd/network/25-infra.link` using the xref:fcct-config.adoc[FCCT] configuration snippet shown below:

.Example: Customize NIC via systemd Link File
[source,yaml]
----
storage:
  files:
    - path: /etc/systemd/network/25-infra.link
      mode: 0644
      contents:
        inline: |
          [Match]
          MACAddress=12:34:56:78:9a:bc
          [Link]
          Name=infra
----

== Using Udev Rules
Similarly, also through Ignition configs, to name NIC with the MAC address `12:34:56:78:9a:bc` to "infra", create a xref:https://linux.die.net/man/8/udev[udev rule] at `/etc/udev/rules.d/80-ifname.rules` using the xref:fcct-config.adoc[FCCT] configuration snippet shown below:

.Example: Customize NIC via Udev Rules
[source,yaml]
----
storage:
  files:
    - path: /etc/udev/rules.d/80-ifname.rules
      mode: 0644
      contents:
        inline: |

>           SUBSYSTEM=="net", ACTION=="add", DRIVERS=="?*", ATTR{address}=="12:34:56:78:9a:bc", ATTR{type}=="1", NAME="infra"'

Reviewer 3: off topic: is `ATTR{type}=="1"` a way to match based on the type of networking interface?

Author: :open_mouth: 
I believe it is. This would help a lot with supporting custom names in networking devices in console-login-helper-messages!

----

== Networking in the Initramfs via Kernel Arguments

> If networking in the initramfs is required, the Dracut argument `ifname=` dynamically creates a udev rule to change the name of a NIC.

Reviewer 3: It feels like we might need to give the user some more background information. Maybe something like:

```suggestion
If networking in the initramfs is required, the kernel argument `ifname=` will dynamically create a udev rule to change the name of a NIC in the initramfs. If the custom name needs to be applied to the real root then a systemd .link file or udev rule, as discussed earlier on this page, will need to get created via Ignition. See [this issue](https://github.com/coreos/fedora-coreos-tracker/issues/553) for more details.
```

Reviewer 3: ahh. I see this information is in the last paragraph. Maye we can add some of this down there and add a link to the issue down there so people can get more context on why they need to do both.

Currently, unlike other parts of the networking config from the initramfs (e.g. static IPs, hostnames, etc.), these udev rules are not persisted into the real root. If the custom name needs to be applied to the real root, either a link file or udev rule must be created, as shown above. See xref:https://github.com/coreos/fedora-coreos-tracker/issues/553[this issue] for more details.

> For example, to name NIC with the MAC `12:34:56:78:9a:bc` to "infra", provide the argument `ifname=infra:12:34:56:78:9a:bc`. A udev rule like the following would be created in the initramfs:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, to give the NIC with the MAC `12:34:56:78:9a:bc` a name of "infra", provide a `ifname=infra:12:34:56:78:9a:bc` kernel argument. A udev rule would be created in the initramfs like:
```
